Add EIP: Block-in-Blobs (BiB) (#11212)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-8142.md

---
eip: 8142
title: Block-in-Blobs (BiB)
description: Ensures execution payload data availability via blobs

> author: Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Jihoon Song <jihoonsong.dev@gmail.com>, Tau Lepton (@frisitano), Thomas Thiery (@soispoke) <thomas.thiery@ethereum.org>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Jihoon Song <jihoon.song@ethereum.org>, Tau Lepton (@frisitano), Thomas Thiery (@soispoke) <thomas.thiery@ethereum.org>
```

Reviewer: Could you change? @kevaundray

> author: Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Jihoon Song <jihoonsong.dev@gmail.com>, Tau Lepton (@frisitano), Thomas Thiery (@soispoke) <thomas.thiery@ethereum.org>

Author: ```suggestion
author: Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Jihoon Song <jihoonsong.dev@gmail.com>, Francesco Risitano (@frisitano), Thomas Thiery (@soispoke) <thomas.thiery@ethereum.org>
```

discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-8142-block-in-blobs-bib/27621
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2026-01-29
requires: 4844, 7594
---

## Abstract

zkEVMs allow validators to verify the correctness of an execution payload using a proof, without downloading or executing the payload itself. However, removing the requirement to download the execution payload, also removes the implicit DA guarantee; a block producer can publish a valid proof and withhold the execution-payload data since attesters no longer need it for consensus.

> This EIP introduces Block-in-Blobs (BiB), a mechanism that requires the execution-payload data to be published in blob data, in the same beacon block that carries the corresponding execution payload's header. This ensures that execution payloads are always available even when validators no longer require them to verify the state transition function(STF).

Reviewer 2: > This ensures that execution payloads are always available even when validators no longer require them to verify the state transition function(STF).

Maybe be good to remove the "always available", since these are blobs which get deleted after some defined window.

Author: Yeah the word available is a bit weird, it was meant in the sense of "data availability" -- if we had named it "data publishing", then this would have been easier to read. I will change it it to "always published"

> This EIP introduces Block-in-Blobs (BiB), a mechanism that requires the execution-payload data to be published in blob data, in the same beacon block that carries the corresponding execution payload's header. This ensures that execution payloads are always available even when validators no longer require them to verify the state transition function(STF).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP introduces Block-in-Blobs (BiB), a mechanism that requires the execution-payload data to be published in blob data, in the same beacon block that carries the corresponding execution payload. This ensures that execution payloads are always available even when validators no longer require them to verify the state transition function(STF).
```

`BeaconBlock` does not carry `ExecutionPayloadHeader`. We should modify `ExecutionPayload` in the CL to add new fields such as `payload_blob_count`.

Author: It carries the ExecutionPayload which has the fields from the header?

Replacing it with `ExecutionPayload` may be confusing because the block would no longer carry the full payload

Author: I think this terminology aligns with using execution payload header: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/11212#issuecomment-3830734611

Even though its flattened in the ExecutionPayload struct

> This EIP introduces Block-in-Blobs (BiB), a mechanism that requires the execution-payload data to be published in blob data, in the same beacon block that carries the corresponding execution payload's header. This ensures that execution payloads are always available even when validators no longer require them to verify the state transition function(STF).

Author: This is saying that validators still verify the STF, its just that they don't need to download the execution payload to do so -- was it interpreted differently?

> This EIP introduces Block-in-Blobs (BiB), a mechanism that requires the execution-payload data to be published in blob data, in the same beacon block that carries the corresponding execution payload's header. This ensures that execution payloads are always available even when validators no longer require them to verify the state transition function(STF).

Reviewer: Hmm... I have no idea how I got this. It looks fine, nvm 😅

In short, BiB works by having the block producer encode the execution-payload data into blobs as part of the execution layer's STF, requiring the beacon block’s blob KZG commitments to commit to those payload-blobs.

## Motivation

**Validation via re-execution**

Today, validators verify execution payloads by:

1) Downloading the execution payload
2) Executing the payload locally
3) Checking the resulting state root and other fields against the fields in the header

Implicitly this guarantees execution payload availability because the payload cannot be verified unless the node downloads it.

**Validation with zkEVMs**

With zkEVMs, validators instead:

1) Download a proof attesting to the correctness of the execution payload

> 2) Download the execution payload header

Author: I think we can introduce `NewPayloadRequestHeader` into 8025 and then modify this accordingly since it relies on 8025, versus introducing it in this EIP

3) Verify the proof with respects to the payload header (and other commitments)

In this model, validators no longer require access to the full execution payload data itself in order to verify its correctness.

**The DA problem**

> Removing the re-execution requirement in consensus, also removes the implicit requirement that the payload be made available.

Reviewer 3: I think the current wording could be interpreted to mean that payload availability is no longer a conensus requirement.

```suggestion
Removing the re-execution requirement in consensus removes the implicit requirement that consensus clients download the execution payload.
```

A malicious or rational builder could:

- Publish a valid proof for a valid execution payload
- Withhold the execution-payload data entirely

> *Builders*: Since builders will always need to re-execute in order to build blocks, a malicious builder would not publish the execution payload ensuring that they are the only ones that can build on top of the current chain.

Author: > a malicious builder would not publish the execution payload ensuring that they are the only ones that can build on top of the current chain.

From @soispoke -- couldn't another builder use BALs to build on top of the latest state, even without the payload?

> *RPC and indexers*: Many nodes such as RPC providers and indexers cannot solely rely on execution proofs and must re-execute the execution payload.

Reviewer 3: I don't follow this point. Could you elaborate on this please?

Author: Here I was trying to say that validators could come to consensus on a payload, but if that payload is never revealed then other entities cannot make use of the updated state -- Builders wouldn't be able to build ontop of the block because they don't know what changed. RPC providers would similarly not be able to function because they need to apply the state updates to their databases (the BAL would be in the execution payload)

Author: Let me know if this should be rephrased to be clearer!

BiB addresses this by making the execution payload available via blobs.

## Specification

### Definitions

### Execution-payload data

**Execution-payload data** refers to the subset of the ExecutionPayload that must be made available via blobs. This includes:

- `transactions`
- `withdrawals`
- `requests`

See [What is included in execution-payload data?](#what-is-included-in-execution-payload-data) in the Rationale for why these fields are included and others are not.

### Overview and Invariants

BiB ensures the proven payload is published:

- The beacon block references a list of blob KZG commitments (via 4844/PeerDas)

> - A prefix of those commitments is reserved for the execution-payload data encoded into blobs

Author: From @soispoke 

idk if it's discussed later but curious to know why the prefix option is preferable to a bitmap, another gossip subnet that only contain payload blobs, etc..

- A zkEVM proof for the block must bind the proven execution payload to those prefixed blob commitments.

**Payload availability invariant:** A valid block implies there exists an ordered list of blobs whose bytes decode to the canonical execution-payload data, and the KZG commitments for these blobs match the first `payload_blob_count` blob commitments referenced by the block. The existing DAS mechanism will ensure that those blobs are available.

### Parameters

#### New Parameters

| Name | Value | Description |
|------|-------|-------------|

> | `MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` | TBD | Maximum number of blobs that may be used to encode the execution payload |

Reviewer 3: Why constrain this instead of letting market dynamics/block builders determine how to build blocks?

Reviewer: Isn't block builder pays for payload-blobs? In the `Fee Accounting` section below, it says: "The cost of including payload-blobs, in terms of blob gas usage, is implicitly paid by the builder, and reflected in block profitability."

I also think it feels not right to specify this constant as `gas_limit` affects on this value, which is determined dynamically by validators.

Author: I think its opportunity cost because if we imagine that there are a lot of type3 transactions that want to be included, the builder must leave space for payload blobs, so they can't include upto MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK.

So payload blobs are taking up space that could have been used for type3 transactions

| `USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB` | `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * USABLE_BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT` | Total usable bytes per blob |

### Referenced Helpers

Throughout this proposal we use methods and classes defined in the corresponding consensus 4844/7594 specs.

Specifically, we use the following methods from [polynomial-commitments.md](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/46c1199d6b4584ba484dec807f03b8e6211dd725/specs/deneb/polynomial-commitments.md?#introduction):

- [verify_blob_kzg_proof_batch](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/46c1199d6b4584ba484dec807f03b8e6211dd725/specs/deneb/polynomial-commitments.md#L578)
- [blob_to_kzg_commitment](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/86fb82b221474cc89387fa6436806507b3849d88/specs/deneb/polynomial-commitments.md#blob_to_kzg_commitment)

And the following methods from [beacon-chain.md](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/86fb82b221474cc89387fa6436806507b3849d88/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#introduction):

- [kzg_commitment_to_versioned_hash](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/86fb82b221474cc89387fa6436806507b3849d88/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#kzg_commitment_to_versioned_hash)

> ### Helpers

Reviewer: All these helpers belong to the EL. It can be placed under the `Execution layer` section. In other words, the CL remains payload-blob encoding rule agnostic.

#### bytes_to_blobs

```python

> def bytes_to_blobs(data: bytes) -> List[Blob]:

Author: From @soispoke 

would be good to comment somewhere that this approach is somewhat wasteful (worst case scenario you have a whole blob wasted just because there was 1 byte of the payload left to include, and then you have to zero pad the rest)

    """
    Pack arbitrary bytes into one or more blobs.
    First 4 bytes encode the length of the original data (little endian).
    Remaining space in final blob is zero-padded.

    Note: The 4-byte length prefix (max ~4GB) is sufficient as we assume execution
    payloads won't get that big.
    """

>     length_prefix = len(data).to_bytes(4, 'little')

Reviewer: This makes the first blob special from the others. Maybe it doesn't matter as you will have all payload blobs for reconstruction, which makes sure you have this data at hand during the reconstruction.

I'm curious if there is another way to provide a way to verify the integrity of the reconstructed payload, which can lead us to a better decision. Of course I don't mean that current one is suboptimal nor I'm not sure whether it is.

Author: Would be curious to hear if there is a better way -- the number of bytes that the payload occupies will in most cases not fill up every blob, so I think an indicator like this will aways be needed

    prefixed_data = length_prefix + data
    
    # Pad to multiple of USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB
    padding_needed = (USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB - (len(prefixed_data) % USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB)) % USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB

>     prefixed_data = prefixed_data + bytes(padding_needed)

Reviewer 3: Should we move this logic into the bytes_to_blob function? If there is space after encoding all bytes, then pad the blob. I think it would be simpler.

    
    blobs = []
    offset = 0
    
    while offset < len(prefixed_data):

>         chunk = prefixed_data[offset : offset + USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB]

Reviewer 3: Why is it only 6 bits per blob? Wouldn't it be 6 bits per field element and as such `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 6 (bit) / 8 (bits per byte) = 3072 bytes per blob`

        chunk = data[chunk_start : chunk_start + USABLE_BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT]
        
        # Store 31 data bytes in [0:31], the final byte [31] stays zero
        blob[i * 32 : i * 32 + 31] = chunk
    
    return Blob(blob)
```

#### blobs_to_bytes

```python
def blobs_to_bytes(blobs: List[Blob]) -> bytes:
    """
    Unpack blobs back to bytes.
    Reads length prefix (little endian) to determine actual data size.
    """
    raw = bytearray()
    
    for blob in blobs:
        raw.extend(blob_to_bytes(blob))
    
    length = int.from_bytes(raw[0:4], 'little')
    return bytes(raw[4 : 4 + length])

def blob_to_bytes(blob: Blob) -> bytes:
    """
    Extract the 31 usable bytes from each field element.
    Validates that the final byte is zero for each field element.
    """
    result = bytearray()
    
    for i in range(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB):
        # Validate final byte is zero
        assert blob[i * 32 + 31] == 0x00, "Invalid blob: final byte must be zero"
        
        # Extract 31 data bytes
        result.extend(blob[i * 32 : i * 32 + 31])
    
    return bytes(result)
```

#### ExecutionPayloadData

```python

> class ExecutionPayloadData(Container):

Reviewer: This looks like a definition in the CL spec. I think this is a transient data in the EL that is used for payload to payload-blobs conversion.

    n = payload.payload_blob_count
    assert n <= MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    assert len(payload_kzg_commitments) == n
    assert len(payload_kzg_proofs) == n

    # 1. Construct payload blobs from execution-payload data
    payload_data = get_execution_payload_data(payload)
    payload_blobs = execution_payload_data_to_blobs(payload_data)
    assert len(payload_blobs) == n

    # 2. Check the commitments correspond to the expected versioned hash prefix
    payload_versioned_hashes = [
        kzg_commitment_to_versioned_hash(c) for c in payload_kzg_commitments
    ]
    assert expected_blob_versioned_hashes[:n] == payload_versioned_hashes

    # 3. Verify blob–commitment consistency using batch KZG proof verification
    assert verify_blob_kzg_proof_batch(
        blobs=payload_blobs,
        commitments=payload_kzg_commitments,
        proofs=payload_kzg_proofs
    )

    # 4. Proceed with standard EL payload validation / execution
    return execute_payload(payload)
```

### Consensus Layer

#### Validation

The consensus layer does not introduce new blob specific validation rules for payload-blobs beyond what we have for 4844/7594.

> The Consensus Layer relies on `payload_blob_count` in the execution payload header to interpret the ordering of blob commitments, but otherwise treats payload blobs identically to other blobs for availability and networking.

Author: The ExecutionPayload contains ExecutionPayloadHeader fields AFAICT -- ie its a flattened data structure. One reason I say payload header, is because they would also go into the corresponding EL block header

### Networking

BiB reuses the existing blob networking mechanism.

We note the following for consideration:

- Once proofs are made mandatory, a mechanism will be needed for execution payload retrieval. Options include:
    - A separate gossip subtopic with just the execution payload
    - Allowing one to download the first `payload_blob_count` blobs and reconstruct the execution payload using the decode algorithm.

> - Unlike most type 3 blob transactions, payload-blobs will not have been propagated to the network before a block is built. Depending on the deadlines imposed by ePBS, this may imply higher bandwidth requirements from block builders.

Author: This is a good point which I think is closer to what rollups do; use the fast path (l2 network), but as a fallback you can always go to L1 since the data should have been published there.

Just rifting off of what you said; what if nodes can check the gossip topic and if they don't receive the payload, they reconstruct from blobs and then seed the `execution_payload` topic. In this model, I guess everyone would be a "bridge node"

### Fee Accounting

BiB introduces protocol mandated blob usage, rather than user initiated via type-3 transactions. Fee accounting for payload-blobs differ in nature from transaction blob fees as a result.

#### Who pays?

This EIP does not mandate that payload-blobs pay a per-blob fee like transaction blobs.

Instead payload-blobs are treated as builder overhead when constructing the block and would be internalized by the builder. In particular:

- Payload-blobs do not correspond to a user transaction and therefore do not naturally map to a user-paid blob fee.

> - The cost of including payload-blobs, in terms of blob gas usage, is implicitly paid by the builder, and reflected in block profitability.

Reviewer 3: Can you clarify why transactions shouldn't pay a blob gas fee? There is an argument that if a transaction consumes a resource (DA) then they should pay for it.

Reviewer 3: Got you. My question/proposal is that maybe they should pay for blob gas. My proposal is to calculate the per-byte blob cost, the transaction would then pay `max(call_data_cost(tx_bytes), blob_data_cost(tx_bytes))` where `blob_data_cost = blob_byte_cost * len(tx_bytes)` or something of this nature. Or maybe just entirely replace the `call_data_cost` with the `blob_byte_cost`, I'm not sure I'm just thinking out loud.

#### Do payload-blobs compete with transaction blobs for capacity?

Because payload blobs consume blob gas, they directly influence blob congestion and the blob base fee.

#### Open questions and future considerations

> - Pre-zk the cost to validate payload blobs is also felt by validators too. So these blobs are in some sense heavier than normal blobs. Should this be priced into blob_gas_used?

Author: Right, I think the only part that might be somewhat heavy(relative to verification) would be computing the kzg commitments -- the zk variant would mvoe the cost mostly to pairings

> - Pre-zk the cost to validate payload blobs is also felt by validators too. So these blobs are in some sense heavier than normal blobs. Should this be priced into blob_gas_used?

Reviewer: It feels like multidimensional gas would make more sense that can handle payload-blob gas fee separately from normal blob gas fee.

- Networking related: Payload-blobs require higher bandwidth due to the fact that they will not have been in the public mempool
- Explicit protocol level pricing for payload blobs

## Rationale

### What is included in execution-payload data?

Execution-payload data includes `transactions`, `withdrawals`, and `requests`. This provides a self-contained "bundle": where indexers for example can decode the blobs without requiring CL state access or re-execution.

**Why not the header?** The header cannot be put into blobs because it contains `payload_blob_count`, which depends on the number of blobs; causing a circular dependency.

Note: Withdrawals and requests are technically redundant (withdrawals are CL-derived, requests can be recomputed by executing transactions).

### Builder discretion vs reserving `k` blobs

This EIP specifies that the block builder choose `payload_blob_count`, subject to the constraints imposed by `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` and `MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.

> An alternative would have been to always reserve `k` blobs, where `k` corresponds to the worse case execution payload size. While this provides better predictability, it reduces flexibility under blob congestion.

Author: From @soispoke 

worse -> worst ?

> An alternative would have been to always reserve `k` blobs, where `k` corresponds to the worse case execution payload size. While this provides better predictability, it reduces flexibility under blob congestion.

Reviewer 3: Is there a third alternative, namely, leaving this to market dynamics based on gas/blob gas pricing?

Author: I think so, though I'd want to double click on what it means for a rational builder since they are not explicitly paying for the payload blob.

Will CC @Ma-Julian for this and the whole EIP for thoughts

### Why not encode execution-payload data inside the core EL execution logic?

Doing it in the EL STF would require payload-blob commitments or versioned hashes to be made visible inside the core execution logic, rather than being handled at the Engine API boundary.

### When zkEVM proofs become mandatory, why can't those nodes download the execution payload?

The execution payload grows linearly with the gas limit, so as the gas limit increases the bandwidth requirement for these nodes will subsequently increase, if attesters are required to download the payload for DA. 

### Compression algorithm for encoding execution-payload data

Compression can be used on the serialized execution-payload data. This (in theory) should allow the usage of less payload-blobs, depending on the compression ratio. The tradeoffs being:

- That we will use more CPU/proving cycles for decompression

> - A breaking change since we want to decompress on the hot-path. What this means is that the transactions would need to be compressed in the payload, and then decompressed when we attempt to validate it. 

Author: I think this holds in all cases because it would imply a change to the execution-payload data (currently transactions) -- in particular, it would mean that the transactions would become a sequence of bytes representing a compressed ssz/rlp encoded list of transactions

> - A breaking change since we want to decompress on the hot-path. What this means is that the transactions would need to be compressed in the payload, and then decompressed when we attempt to validate it. 

Reviewer: It holds for all cases only when you're re-executing IMO. If you rely on execution proofs and didn't stake +512 ETH, you won't decompress to reconstruct the payload.

> - A breaking change since we want to decompress on the hot-path. What this means is that the transactions would need to be compressed in the payload, and then decompressed when we attempt to validate it. 

Reviewer: Or.. all nodes reconstruct payload in this design? Is that what I'm missing?

Whether we should use a compression algorithm and which one requires more investigation, in particular we need to investigate:

- The average compression ratios achieved
- The proving cycle overhead
- The invasiveness of now requiring consensus aware objects to be compressed when passed for validation.

For now we recommend no compression algorithm.

### Serialization algorithm for encoding execution-payload data

> Serialization of the execution-payload data uses SSZ. One could choose a more zk friendly serialization algorithm, however there is currently no evidence showing that SSZ deserialization is a bottleneck and using SSZ introduces no extra dependencies.

Reviewer: Hope we have SSZ in the EL by then 🤞

> As for RLP, since we are serializing the ExecutionPayload outside of the EL STF, SSZ is the natural choice.

Reviewer: Just to be clear, the EL is still responsible for producing payload blobs and the CL remains ignorant, right?

Author: yep, but its the engine_newPayload method (which has the ExecutionPayload from the CL) and not the EL block

### On MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK

> Given payload-blobs take precedence over type-3 transactions, specifying this value will mean that the builder won't be able to fill the block up with just payload-blobs. 

Reviewer 3: Is there anything wrong with that if it's economically favourable for a builder to do so? Couldn't market dynamics via priority fee allow for far inclusion?

Author: > My point is that there is nothing inherently wrong with a block full of payload blobs

Yeah I agree and this is a fair point

I think having the builder control the market for free seems undesirable though, in this case they would

- Add non-type-3 transactions for 10 minutes such that users need to keep increasing their priority fee (FOCIL wouldn't help here since blob capacity is reached)
- Once priority fees are at a desirable amount for the builder, they start accepting type-3 transactions

MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK doesn't completely mitigate this though, it just limits how effective it is. One reason I don't like MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK is that it does also mean that the builder has another constraint when they are block building; the set of transactions when serialized must not only fit within MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK but this more constrained MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK.

Will also CC @anderselowsson since he worked on 7918

Reviewer 3: Please correct me if I'm wrong, but I don't think this EIP introduces any new censorship vectors. In the current protocol, fulu, if a builder doesn't want to include a type-3 transaction, no one is forcing inclusion?

Author: yeah exactly, since we don't have FOCIL

> Given payload-blobs take precedence over type-3 transactions, specifying this value will mean that the builder won't be able to fill the block up with just payload-blobs. 

Reviewer: One thing to note is that the exact number of payload-blobs is known after you have the full block. Thus, you might end up including less blob transactions than you expected, or more than possible. I'm not sure if this would be a big problem for builders (and solo stakers), but it's a bit circular dependency thing.

Author: yeah the builder will need to know how many bytes roughly each transaction will occupy -- if on average the blocks they build are < 128KB, then they would just need to ensure that they have space for at least one blob when the block is built

- `transactions`

See [What is included in execution-payload data?](#what-is-included-in-execution-payload-data) in the Rationale for why only transactions are included.

```python
class ExecutionPayloadData(Container):
    # Transaction is a RLP encoded byte array
    transactions: List[Transaction, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD]
```

Note: The maximum bound for this list is inherited from the corresponding ExecutionPayload field limit defined in the consensus specification.

##### ExecutionPayloadHeader

This EIP adds a new field to the `ExecutionPayloadHeader`:

- payload_blob_count : uint64

Semantics:

- Let `blob_kzg_commitments` be the ordered list of kzg commitments referenced by the beacon block
- The first `payload_blob_count` entries of `blob_kzg_commitments` are the payload-blob commitments (ie commitments to the blobs that correspond to the payload data)
- The remaining entries (if any) are for type 3 blob transactions.

##### BlobsBundle

For the zkEVM-optimized variant of `engine_getPayload`, this EIP extends `BlobsBundle` with an additional field:

- `payload_kzg_proofs`: List[KZGProof]

Semantics:

> - Contains random point KZG proofs for payload blobs only (not type-3 transaction blobs)

Reviewer 2: > random point

Would be required to explain how these random points are calcualted (as I ~somewhat did in [here](https://hackmd.io/@jsign/eth-zkvm-biob-proving#With-execution-payload-data-sampling))?

    # 5. Run EL STF (which now checks correct blob_gas_used blob limit using header.payload_blob_count)
    return execute_payload(payload)
```

##### engine_newPayload - zkEVM-Optimized Variant

**Note:** Once zkEVM proofs are required for consensus, `newPayload` will be executed inside a zkEVM to generate a proof, rather than being executed natively by validators. This variant is designed to be cheaper in that context.

This variant replaces the MSM in `blob_to_kzg_commitment` with polynomial opening proofs, which are cheaper to verify inside a zkEVM. The payload, commitments and KZG proofs are private inputs to the zkEVM circuit, while the corresponding versioned hashes (and payload header) are public inputs.

```python
def new_payload(
    payload: ExecutionPayload,
    expected_blob_versioned_hashes: List[VersionedHash], # public input

    # BiB additions: prefix metadata for payload blobs
    payload_kzg_commitments: List[KZGCommitment],  # private input
    payload_kzg_proofs: List[KZGProof],            # private input
    ...
) -> PayloadStatus:

    # 0. Declared payload blob count from the header

>     n = payload.payload_blob_count

Reviewer 2: Wondering a bit if we need this `payload_blob_count` in the execution payload header.
In theory for EL block construction that happens in `execution_payload`, it can be provided by `len(payload_kzg_commitments)` and avoid some checks here -- so at least for the engine API layer, might be somewhat redundant.

We might still need it for CL reasons. I kind of assumed it exists in a previous comment I did reg commitments/proofs are in new fields in CL `BlobsBundle`, maybe isn't required.

No strong opinion though -- just sharing a thought.

Author: Ah right, sorry I read it as `len(kzg_commitments)` -- yep this is possible, but then I think the payload_blob_count would need to be a public input to newPayload?

Reviewer 2: Why do we need `payload_blob_count` as a public input?

The `payload_kzg_commitments` is already defined as a public input, and `payload_blob_count` is the length, no?

The way I think about public input is basically `NewPayloadRequest` being hte public input (as we discussed in 8025 before). This includes indirectly the payload plus the extra sidecar stuff (requests, withdrawals, parent_beacon_root, and these new stuff of payload_* things).

Author: why is `payload_kzg_commitments` a public input?

- Unlike most type 3 blob transactions, payload-blobs will not have been propagated to the network before a block is built. Depending on the deadlines imposed by ePBS, this may imply higher bandwidth requirements from block builders.

### Fee Accounting

BiB introduces protocol mandated blob usage, rather than user initiated via type-3 transactions. Fee accounting for payload-blobs differ in nature from transaction blob fees as a result.

#### Who pays?

This EIP does not mandate that payload-blobs pay a per-blob fee like transaction blobs.

Instead payload-blobs are treated as builder overhead when constructing the block and would be internalized by the builder. In particular:

- Payload-blobs do not correspond to a user transaction and therefore do not naturally map to a user-paid blob fee.

> - The cost of including payload-blobs, in terms of blob gas usage, is implicitly paid by the builder, and reflected in block profitability.

Author: Ah yeah I mentioned it in a different comment, re it being "opportunity cost" for the builder, but there might not be any type-3 transactions.

I'll use protocol accepted cost -- I think we still want to emphasise the case where the builder use payload blobs to inflate the priority fee, ie they just include large payload transactions, taking up the space for blobs with payload blobs, so rollups etc will increase their priority fee to get their blob in.

#### Do payload-blobs compete with transaction blobs for capacity?

> Because payload blobs consume blob gas, they directly influence blob congestion and the blob base fee.

Reviewer 2: Sidenote: might be useful to ask RIG team to estimate the impact of this maybe using history?

#### Open questions and future considerations

<!-- TODO -->
- Pre-zk the cost to validate payload blobs is also felt by validators too. So these blobs are in some sense heavier than normal blobs. Should this be priced into blob_gas_used?
- Networking related: Payload-blobs require higher bandwidth due to the fact that they will not have been in the public mempool
- Explicit protocol level pricing for payload blobs

## Rationale

### What is included in execution-payload data?

Execution-payload data includes only `transactions`.

Under the current protocol, transaction data is the only component of the execution payload that is not required by the consensus layer and cannot be derived from other components:

- **Withdrawals** can be derived on the consensus layer

> - **Execution requests** are the output of executing transactions and can be recomputed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Execution requests and BALs** are the output of executing transactions and can be recomputed
```
worth adding it?

**Why not the header?** The header cannot be put into blobs because it contains `payload_blob_count`, which depends on the number of blobs; causing a circular dependency.

### Builder discretion vs reserving `k` blobs

This EIP specifies that the block builder choose `payload_blob_count`, subject to the constraints imposed by `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` and `MAX_PAYLOAD_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.

An alternative would have been to always reserve `k` blobs, where `k` corresponds to the worst case execution payload size. While this provides better predictability, it reduces flexibility under blob congestion.

### Why not encode execution-payload data inside the core EL execution logic?

Doing it in the EL STF would require payload-blob commitments or versioned hashes to be made visible inside the core execution logic, rather than being handled at the Engine API boundary.

### When zkEVM proofs become mandatory, why can't those nodes download the execution payload?

> The execution payload grows linearly with the gas limit, so as the gas limit increases the bandwidth requirement for these nodes will subsequently increase, if attesters are required to download the payload for DA. 

Reviewer 2: Yep, I got the idea. My point was mostly that the sentence might be confusing on how it is redacted. Just a nit.

> The execution payload grows linearly with the gas limit, so as the gas limit increases the bandwidth requirement for these nodes will subsequently increase, if attesters are required to download the payload for DA. 

Author: rephrased

---
eip: 8142
title: Block-in-Blobs (BiB)
description: Ensures execution payload data availability via blobs
author: Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Jihoon Song <jihoon.song@ethereum.org>, Francesco Risitano (@frisitano), Thomas Thiery (@soispoke) <thomas.thiery@ethereum.org>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-8142-block-in-blobs-bib/27621
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2026-01-29

> requires: 4844, 7594, 7928

Reviewer 4: EIP-7928 not found

## Specification

### Overview and Invariants

BiB ensures the proven payload is published:

- The beacon block references a list of blob KZG commitments (via 4844/PeerDas)
- A prefix of those commitments is reserved for the execution-payload data encoded into blobs
- A zkEVM proof for the block must bind the proven execution payload to those prefixed blob commitments.

**Payload availability invariant:** A valid block implies there exists an ordered list of blobs whose bytes decode to the canonical execution-payload data, and the KZG commitments for these blobs match the first `payload_blob_count` blob commitments referenced by the block. The existing DAS mechanism will ensure that those blobs are available.

### Parameters

#### Referenced Parameters

These parameters are defined in EIP-4844 and related specs:

| Name | Value | Source |
|------|-------|--------|
| `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB` | `4096` | EIP-4844 |
| `BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT` | `32` | EIP-4844 |
| `GAS_PER_BLOB` | `2**17` | EIP-4844 |
| `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` | Varies by fork | PeerDAS/BPO |

#### Derived Constants

| Name | Value | Description |
|------|-------|-------------|

> | `USABLE_BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT` | `BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT - 1` (31) | Usable bytes per field element (final byte must be zero to stay under BLS modulus) |

Reviewer 4: Is this final byte or the first byte? If it should stay under a modulus (which is a number (?)) then I'd assume it should be the first byte to be zero, not last byte (?)

And the following methods from [polynomial-commitments-sampling.md](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/3a2304981a3b820a22b518fe4859f4bba0ebc90b/specs/fulu/polynomial-commitments-sampling.md):

- [compute_cells_and_kzg_proofs](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/3a2304981a3b820a22b518fe4859f4bba0ebc90b/specs/fulu/polynomial-commitments-sampling.md#compute_cells_and_kzg_proofs)

And the following methods from [beacon-chain.md](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/86fb82b221474cc89387fa6436806507b3849d88/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#introduction):

- [kzg_commitment_to_versioned_hash](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/86fb82b221474cc89387fa6436806507b3849d88/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#kzg_commitment_to_versioned_hash)

#### Helpers

##### bytes_to_blobs

```python
def bytes_to_blobs(data: bytes) -> List[Blob]:
    """
    Pack arbitrary bytes into one or more blobs.
    Remaining space in final blob is zero-padded.
    """
    blobs = []
    offset = 0

    while offset < len(data):
        chunk = data[offset : offset + USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB]

>         blob = bytes_to_blob(chunk)

Author: changed blob_to_bytes to chunk_to_bytes

        blobs.append(blob)
        offset += USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB

    return blobs

def bytes_to_blob(data: bytes) -> Blob:
    """
    Pack up to USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB bytes into a single blob.
    If data is shorter than USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB, it is zero-padded.
    Each 31-byte chunk is stored in bytes [0:31] of a field element,
    with byte [31] (the final byte) set to zero to ensure value < BLS modulus.
    """
    assert len(data) <= USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB

    # Pad to exactly USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB if needed
    if len(data) < USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB:
        data = data + bytes(USABLE_BYTES_PER_BLOB - len(data))

    blob = bytearray(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT)

    for i in range(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB):
        chunk_start = i * USABLE_BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT
        chunk = data[chunk_start : chunk_start + USABLE_BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT]

        # Store 31 data bytes in [0:31], the final byte [31] stays zero

>         blob[i * 32 : i * 32 + 31] = chunk

Reviewer 4: This has hardcoded constants , pretty sure this should be:

```suggestion
        blob[i * BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT : i * BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT + USABLE_BYTES_PER_FIELD_ELEMENT] = chunk
```

(replace magic numbers with their respective constants)

    return Blob(blob)
```

##### blobs_to_bytes

```python
def blobs_to_bytes(blobs: List[Blob]) -> bytes:
    """
    Unpack blobs back to bytes.
    Returns all usable bytes from all blobs (including any padding).
    """
    raw = bytearray()

    for blob in blobs:
        raw.extend(blob_to_bytes(blob))

    return bytes(raw)

def blob_to_bytes(blob: Blob) -> bytes:
    """
    Extract the 31 usable bytes from each field element.
    Validates that the final byte is zero for each field element.
    """
    result = bytearray()

    for i in range(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB):
        # Validate final byte is zero
        assert blob[i * 32 + 31] == 0x00, "Invalid blob: final byte must be zero"

        # Extract 31 data bytes

>         result.extend(blob[i * 32 : i * 32 + 31])

Reviewer 4: Likely want to change magic numbers with constants

    return bytes(result)
```

##### get_execution_payload_data

```python
def get_execution_payload_data(payload: ExecutionPayload) -> ExecutionPayloadData:
    """
    Extract the data from an ExecutionPayload that must be made available via blobs.
    """
    return ExecutionPayloadData(

>         blockAccessList=payload.blockAccessList,

Reviewer 4: Ah right was already wondering when block level access lists (BALs) were making the entrance here. It comes somewhat surprising in the code here, maybe a mention previously, or placing this code later might make it more clear.

    This allows extracting just the BAL data without transactions.

    Note: Both BALs and transactions are RLP-encoded lists.
    """
    bals_bytes = RLP.encode(data.bals)
    transactions_bytes = RLP.encode(data.transactions)

    # Create 8-byte header
    bals_length = len(bals_bytes).to_bytes(4, 'little')
    txs_length = len(transactions_bytes).to_bytes(4, 'little')
    header = bals_length + txs_length

    # Combine header + data
    payload_bytes = header + bals_bytes + transactions_bytes

    return bytes_to_blobs(payload_bytes)
```

##### blobs_to_execution_payload_data

```python
def blobs_to_execution_payload_data(blobs: List[Blob]) -> ExecutionPayloadData:
    """
    Canonically decode an ordered list of blobs into execution-payload data.

    Decoding steps:
      1. If blobs is empty, return empty ExecutionPayloadData
      2. raw = blobs_to_bytes(blobs)
      3. Read 8-byte header: [4 bytes BAL length][4 bytes tx length]
      4. Split into bals_bytes and transactions_bytes
      5. Decode each with RLP
      6. return ExecutionPayloadData(bals, transactions)
    """
    # Special case: empty payload (zero blobs)
    if len(blobs) == 0:

>         return ExecutionPayloadData(bals=[], transactions=[])

Author: removed empty payload special case altogether

```python
def extract_type3_data(transactions: List[Transaction]) -> Tuple[List[Blob], List[KZGCommitment], List[List[KZGProof]]]:
    """
    Extract blobs, KZG commitments, and cell proofs from type-3 (blob) transactions.

    Returns a tuple of (blobs, commitments, cell_proofs) in the order they appear
    in the transaction list.

    Implementation note: This is not new logic - a function(s) like this should already be available in your existing getPayload/blob bundle implementation.
    """
    ...
```

**Invertibility invariant:** `execution_payload_data_to_blobs` and `blobs_to_execution_payload_data` are mutual inverses on valid execution-payload data.

#### Data structures

##### ExecutionPayloadData

**Execution-payload data** refers to the subset of the ExecutionPayload that must be made available via blobs. This includes:

- `bals` (Block Access List added in EIP-7928)
- `transactions`

See [What is included in execution-payload data?](#what-is-included-in-execution-payload-data) in the Rationale for details.

```python
class ExecutionPayloadData(Container):
    # BAL is a RLP encoded byte array

>     bals: List[BAL, MAX_BALS_PER_PAYLOAD]

Reviewer 4: Are these SSZ-typed lists? What is `MAX_BALS_PER_PAYLOAD`? Seems that these are bound per block, so there is one BAL per block. https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7928 BALs were SSZd before but are now RLPd, so there is no `MAX_BALS_PER_PAYLOAD` introduced there.

>     bals: List[BAL, MAX_BALS_PER_PAYLOAD]

Reviewer 5: `MAX_BALS_PER_PAYLOAD` isn't defined.
I guess it's 1, or am I missing something here?

    # Transaction is a RLP encoded byte array
    transactions: List[Transaction, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD]
```

Note: The maximum bound for this list is inherited from the corresponding ExecutionPayload field limit defined in the consensus specification.

##### ExecutionPayloadHeader

This EIP adds a new field to the `ExecutionPayloadHeader`:

- payload_blob_count : uint64

Semantics:

> - Let `blob_kzg_commitments` be the ordered list of kzg commitments referenced by the beacon block

Reviewer 4: Is this a new field or a clarification of an existing field?

Author: This is from the consensus specs

- The first `payload_blob_count` entries of `blob_kzg_commitments` are the payload-blob commitments (i.e. commitments to the blobs that correspond to the payload data)

> - The remaining entries (if any) are for type 3 blob transactions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The remaining entries (if any) are for type-3 blob transactions.
```

For consistency

    # Compute cells and cell proofs
    payload_cells_and_proofs = [compute_cells_and_kzg_proofs(b) for b in payload_blobs]
    payload_cell_proofs = [proofs for _, proofs in payload_cells_and_proofs]

    # 6. Extract type-3 transaction blobs, commitments, and cell proofs
    type3_blobs, type3_commitments, type3_cell_proofs = extract_type3_data(payload.transactions)
    type3_versioned_hashes = []
    for tx in payload.transactions:
        if tx.type == BLOB_TX_TYPE:
            type3_versioned_hashes.extend(tx.blob_versioned_hashes)

    # 7. Combine: payload blobs first, then type-3 blobs
    all_blobs = payload_blobs + type3_blobs
    all_commitments = payload_commitments + type3_commitments
    all_cell_proofs = payload_cell_proofs + type3_cell_proofs
    all_blob_versioned_hashes = payload_versioned_hashes + type3_versioned_hashes

    return GetPayloadResponse(
        execution_payload=payload,
        blobs_bundle=BlobsBundle(
            commitments=all_commitments,
            blobs=all_blobs,
            proofs=all_cell_proofs
        ),
        block_value=calculate_block_value(payload)
    )
```

> Note: The builder must account for payload blob usage when selecting type-3 transactions to ensure the total blob count does not exceed `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.

Reviewer 4: Ok interesting, because this thus means that larger blocks will thus use space which could otherwise be used by type-3 (blob) transactions. The builder can build this for free (does not have to pay) and can thus also, for free (assuming enough txs available in txpool) take space which blob txs could use, and as result could thus also (for free) raise the blob gas price.
This would open a secondary market where the builder has a choice: either insert a blob (this limits the payload size) or do not insert it, and pick other transactions. The builder will choose what is most profitable.

Author: I think this okay, because someone is paying for the transaction, just need to ensure that those transactions' calldata is priced fairly wrt blobs (I think i mention this, but can make it more explicit)

##### engine_getPayload - zkEVM-Optimized Variant

For the zkEVM-optimized variant, the builder must additionally compute random point KZG proofs for the payload blobs, which will be used as private inputs in the zkEVM circuit for payload consistency verification.

This variant extends `BlobsBundle` with an additional `payload_kzg_proofs` field containing random point KZG proofs for payload blobs.

```python
def get_payload_zk(payload_id: PayloadId) -> GetPayloadResponse:
    # 1. Build the block (select transactions, etc.)
    payload = build_execution_payload(payload_id)

    # 2. Check for empty payload (special case)

>     if len(payload.transactions) == 0:

Reviewer 4: Am wondering a bit why this case is explicitly mentioned here. Is this necessary? Is it part of the spec that it should be coded this way? This seems like an optional optimization (also applies to previous applications of this block of code or similar code)

    assert len(payload_blobs) == n

    # 2. Check the commitments correspond to the expected versioned hash prefix
    payload_versioned_hashes = [
        kzg_commitment_to_versioned_hash(c) for c in payload_kzg_commitments
    ]
    assert expected_blob_versioned_hashes[:n] == payload_versioned_hashes

    # 3. Verify blob–commitment consistency using batch KZG proof verification
    assert verify_blob_kzg_proof_batch(
        blobs=payload_blobs,
        commitments=payload_kzg_commitments,
        proofs=payload_kzg_proofs
    )

    # 4. Proceed with standard EL payload validation / execution
    return execute_payload(payload)
```

### Consensus Layer

#### Validation

The consensus layer does not introduce new blob specific validation rules for payload-blobs beyond what we have for 4844/7594.

The Consensus Layer relies on `payload_blob_count` in the execution payload header to interpret the ordering of blob commitments, but otherwise treats payload blobs identically to other blobs for availability and networking.

### Networking

BiB reuses the existing blob networking mechanism.

We note the following for consideration:

> - Once proofs are made mandatory, a mechanism will be needed for execution payload retrieval. [EIP-7773](./eip-7773.md) (Glamsterdam) introduces an `execution_payload` gossip topic for this purpose. However, in the context of mandatory proofs where a super majority of stake operates zk validators (which only listen to header topics), a malicious builder could publish only the payload in blobs and gossip the execution payload header without gossiping on the `execution_payload` topic. This would allow zk validators to attest, but other nodes depending on the full payload from the gossip topic would be unable to progress.

Reviewer 4: Which EIP does introduce this gossip topic? I think it should ref that EIP, not Glamsterdam, as that is too broad.

### Fee Accounting

BiB introduces protocol mandated blob usage, rather than user initiated via type-3 transactions. Fee accounting for payload-blobs differ in nature from transaction blob fees as a result.

#### Who pays?

This EIP does not mandate that payload-blobs pay a per-blob fee like transaction blobs.

Instead payload-blobs are treated as a protocol-accepted cost when constructing the block. In particular:

- Payload-blobs do not correspond to a user transaction and therefore do not naturally map to a user-paid blob fee.
- The cost of including payload-blobs, in terms of blob gas usage, is accepted by the protocol as a necessary cost for maintaining data availability.

#### Do payload-blobs compete with transaction blobs for capacity?

Because payload blobs consume blob gas, they directly influence blob congestion and the blob base fee.

#### Can a builder artificially inflate blob gas usage?

A potential concern is whether a malicious builder could create artificially large execution payloads to inflate blob gas usage.

> This attack is economically constrained: to increase the size of the execution payload, a builder must include additional transactions with calldata. Since calldata costs execution gas, the builder would need to pay for this additional data through the normal gas mechanism. The cost of including extra calldata makes it economically unfavorable to artificially inflate payload size solely to manipulate blob fees.

Reviewer 4: This is incomplete as builders could also use the BALs to inflate the size. To do so use all txs from the mempool and use this to create a large BAL (possibly injecting txs and thus paying for it)

#### Open questions and future considerations

<!-- TODO -->
- Pre-zk the cost to validate payload blobs is also felt by validators too. So these blobs are in some sense heavier than normal blobs. Should this be priced into blob_gas_used?
- Networking related: Payload-blobs require higher bandwidth due to the fact that they will not have been in the public mempool
- Explicit protocol level pricing for payload blobs

## Rationale

### What is included in execution-payload data?

Execution-payload data includes `bals` (Block Access Lists from EIP-7928) and `transactions`.

**Why transactions?** Transaction data is the only component of the execution payload that cannot be derived from other components and is not provided by the consensus layer.

> **Why BALs?** While BALs are technically the output of executing transactions and could be recomputed, once zkEVM proofs become mandatory for consensus, validators no longer execute payloads. A malicious builder could publish a valid proof and withhold both the execution payload data and the BALs. This would prevent other builders from constructing subsequent blocks and prevent RPC providers from serving the full state. Including BALs in payload-blobs ensures they remain available.

Reviewer 4: To serve full state, either the BAL or the transactions have to be ready. If the BAL is provided, immediately apply state changes. If the txs are provided, re-execute the transactions to apply the state changes.

I'm not sure here, it depends on the purpose. For historical purposes, to re-verify a block, the BALs are not necessary and only the transactions are necessary. However, if we want to re-execute to verify and to keep up with the tip of the chain, the BALs and the transactions are necessary, because the BALs allow us to execute the txs in parallel which is implicitly necessary by block level access lists (in order to scale the chain by baking in the possibility for parallel execution in the protocol)

**Why not withdrawals?** Withdrawals can be derived on the consensus layer.

**Why not execution requests?** Execution requests can be recomputed from transactions and do not suffer from the same withholding attack as BALs because they are required by the consensus layer for validation.

**Why not the header?** The header cannot be put into blobs because it contains `payload_blob_count`, which depends on the number of blobs; causing a circular dependency.

> **Encoding optimization:** The encoding includes an 8-byte header: `[4 bytes BAL length] [4 bytes transaction length]`. This allows extracting just the BAL data after fetching the first blob.

Reviewer 4: Ah right, now I see why this length encoding is necessary, so we can request the relevant data without having to query the blobs sequentially. However the BALs are encoded first so I believe this means: 
```suggestion
**Encoding optimization:** The encoding includes an 8-byte header: `[4 bytes BAL length] [4 bytes transaction length]`. This allows extracting just the tx data after fetching the first blob.
```

I think this motivation should be added to why this encoding is introduced when the encoding is introduced.

Would changing from RLP to SSZ also allow this feature (know beforehand in which blobs the relevant data is contained)?

<!-- TODO -->
TODO: We could also put the number of blobs that the BAL occupies in the execution payload header.

### Builder discretion vs reserving `k` blobs

This EIP specifies that the block builder choose `payload_blob_count`, subject to the constraint imposed by `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.

> An alternative would have been to always reserve `k` blobs, where `k` corresponds to the worst case execution payload size. While this provides better predictability, it reduces flexibility under blob congestion.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure here, why would you reserve this? The builder is free to pick transactions, so can either include blobs or not

### When zkEVM proofs become mandatory, why can't zk-attestors download the full execution payload?

The execution payload grows linearly with the gas limit. Requiring attesters to download the payload for DA would create an increasing bandwidth burden as the gas limit grows. 

### Compression algorithm for encoding execution-payload data

Compression can be used on the serialized execution-payload data. This (in theory) should allow the usage of less payload-blobs, depending on the compression ratio. The tradeoffs being:

- That we will use more CPU/proving cycles for decompression
- A breaking change since we want to decompress on the hot-path. What this means is that the transactions would need to be compressed in the payload, and then decompressed when we attempt to validate it. 

Whether we should use a compression algorithm and which one requires more investigation, in particular we need to investigate:

- The average compression ratios achieved
- The proving cycle overhead
- The invasiveness of now requiring consensus aware objects to be compressed when passed for validation.

> For now we recommend using no compression algorithm and operating on uncompressed data.

Reviewer 4: I also think this should not be baked into the protocol. This is/should be part of soft-forks where new insights or developments improve the situation. It also pins the protocol to a specific compression algorithm.

### Serialization algorithm for encoding execution-payload data

Serialization of the execution-payload data uses RLP. Since transactions in the ExecutionPayload are already RLP-encoded, we simply RLP-encode the list of transaction bytes without any additional transformation.

> While a more zk-friendly serialization algorithm could be beneficial in the future, this EIP uses RLP for simplicity. Once EIP-7807 (SSZ execution blocks) is implemented, the encoding can be updated to SSZ-serialize the list of SSZ-encoded transaction bytes.

Reviewer 4: I'd argue to spec this EIP to use SSZ and only change it to RLP if it is necessary. BALs were also specified in SSZ first, but later changed to RLP as we could not get consensus on clients to start using SSZ. 

(This EIP could be the driver to switch to SSZ, but only if the EIP intends to use SSZ instead of RLP)
